For a deployed MongoDB solution, [Atlas](https://www.mongodb.com/cloud/atlas) provides a free tier which is perfect for demo and small app usage.

### Sign up to MongoDB Atlas
- [Sign up](https://www.mongodb.com/cloud/atlas) for free (no credit card required), verify email
- Name your org and a project (call them anything you like but make note!)
- Select the free Shared Clusters option
- Choose your provider & region - you can choose any but for region consider your proximity to users (consider researching carbon neutraility too! Save the planet!)
- Stick with free defaults for provisions
- Name your cluster (note this is not the name of your database, you can have multiple databases within a cluster)


**From this point, Atlas provide a thorough `Follow the Get Started` walkthrough. Each step is detailed below with some tips.**

---

### Create a Database User
This is important! You won't be able to connect to your database without it!
- On the left hand side under `SECURITY`, click `Database Access`
- Click `Add New Database User` button
- Choose an auth method - we'll go with Password for this walkthrough
- Enter a username and a password (recommended to use the Autogenerate Secure Password) and make note of them, you'll need them soon!
- For user privileges, go for `Read and write to any database` (you can set up an Atlas admin if you like but for your app to access, read and write is sufficient)
- Keep restrictions and temporary user settings switched off
- Click `Add User`
  
---

### Add IP Address to your Access List
This is also important! You won't be able to connect to your database without it!
- On the left hand side under `SECURITY`, click `Network Access`
- For a quick start, click `ALLOW ACCESS FROM ANYWHERE` - later on you can get more specific and add eg. just your host server IP / your dev machine IP
- Click `Confirm` 
  
---

### Load Sample Data (Optional)
This optional sample data set can be useful for testing out your new cluster
- On the left hand side under `DATA STORAGE` click `Clusters`
- In the sandbox, click the `...` button in the info box
- Click `Load Sample Dataset` and again in the modal
- You'll see the cluster updating with the message 'Loading your sample dataset...'

---

### Connect to your cluster
- On the left hand side under `DATA STORAGE` click `Clusters`
- Click the `CONNECT` button
- There are 3 options here - start with `Connect with the mongo shell` to make sure you can connect remotely without worrying about your driver setup

**Connect from command line**
- If you have the mongo shell installed on your machine you don't need to do anything else
- If you don't have the mongo shell installed and don't want to install it, use a docker container eg.:
  - :arrow_right: `docker run -it --name <new-container-name> -p 27017:27017 mongo bash` (the port map is essential)
- To connect, copy the provided link and switch out the MyFirstDatabase part with what you would like to call your database
  - :arrow_right: `mongo "mongodb+srv://<cluster-name>.fra7q.mongodb.net/<db-name>" --username <username>`
- You may get a startup warning if connecting from a non-admin account but it's okay!
- Once your prompt changes to something like `MongoDB Enterprise atlas-13bcv8-shard-0:PRIMARY>`, you're in!

**Connect from your own app**
Once you've confirmed you have access, try connecting from your own application.
- Whereever your connection string belongs (check your driver docs for this!) use the following format:
    - :arrow_right: `mongodb+srv://<username>:<password>@<cluster-name>.fra7q.mongodb.net/<db-name>?retryWrites=true&w=majority`