***
*_I recommend combining GitBash and Docker containers_* \
*_For more details on other options for local env setup for Windows, check out [this great resource](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/dev-environment/overview)._*
***

# Dev Environment Setup: Windows

### Misceleneous Start-Up 
+ Run all updates 
+ Upgrade to windows 11
+ [Brave browser](https://brave.com/)
    + Set as Default 
    + settings -> Search Engine -> Google
+ SurfShark VPN
+ Istalled Office 
+ Instaled Whastapp Desktop 
+ [Download SharpKeys](https://sharpkeys.en.softonic.com/)
    + SharpKeys is a utility that manages a Registry key that allows Windows to remap one key to any other key. Included in the application is a list of common keyboard keys and a Type Key feature to automatically recognize most keyboard keys. It was originally developed in C# using .NET v2 but has been updated to support .NET 4.0 Client Profile

### VS Code
There are plenty of options for code editors and you are welcome to use any alternatives. VS Code which is a very popular and extendable offering.
- Download and install [VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/download)

### Git & GitBash Setup
Install the [latest release of git](https://git-scm.com/). Keep the standard options (***make sure Git Bash is included in your install***).
When selecting the various options:
- your default editor: Visual Studio Code
- PATH environment: 'Git from the command line and also from 3rd-party software'
- HTTPS transport backend: OpenSSL library
- line ending conversions: 'checkout as-is, commit Unix-style line endings'
- git pull: default
- credential helper: Git Credential Manager Core
- enable symbolic links: true
Others are up to you but the defaults are generally good.

Open GitBash and configure git: \
`git config --global user.name "your name"` eg. `git config --global user.name "getfutureproof"` \
`git config --global user.email "your email"` eg. `git config --global user.email "admin@getfutureproof.co.uk"` \

When working on different operating systems, our line endings may end up getting changed. We will unify our line ending to match Unix-style: \
`git config --global core.autocrlf input`

### Set up your SSH key
- run `ssh-keygen` and follow the instructions. If it asks if you want to overwrite, say no.
- Run `cat ~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub` and copy the output
- Visit the [GitHub SSH Keys setting page](https://github.com/settings/keys) in your browser and click 'New SSH Key'
- Give it a title, anything you like to indicate the machine this key is for, and paste in your key
- The first time you clone and push you may see warning that a new RSA key is being added, this is normal!

***NB: If using the VS Code terminal, we recommend selecting Git Bash as your Default Shell:***
- Open a new terminal in VS Code (see the application top bar)
- From the dropdown that likely says 1. Powershell, choose 'Select Default Shell' and select Git Bash
- Close the terminal and open a new one - the dropdown should now say '1. bash'

---

### Generate Personal Access Token
We strongly recommend that you set up [two factor authentication (2FA)](https://github.com/settings/security) for your GitHub account - and any other accounts for that matter!
\
If you do, you will however need to take one more step when setting up CLI access. \
**NB: From August 21st 2021, all users regardless of auth setup will require a PAT instead of password for CLI access**
- Generate new [Personal Access Token](https://github.com/settings/tokens) - *make sure to copy it!*
- Use this instead of your password on prompt when making your first interaction with GitHub from the CLI (should only happen once)
- If you are not being prompted for a password, run `git config --global --unset user.password` and try again!

---

### Test run GitHub!
Add yourself to your cohort roster in [this repo](https://github.com/getfutureproof/fp_study_notes_hello_github). Roll call!
Note that this repo is used to power our [cohorts website](http://cohorts.getfutureproof.co.uk/) so add your name as you would like it to appear on there!

---

### Install Chocolatey
_Note this is not really "essential" but will be very useful!_ \
The deliciously named [Chocolatey](https://chocolatey.org/) is a popular package manager for Windows applications.

To install it, we are going to use Command Prompt in an administrative shell. \
_Note that once you have installed Chocolatey, you can go back to GitBash and interact with it there._
- **Open Command Prompt in an administrative shell**
    + Open the Start menu
    + Type "command" - Command Prompt should come up as the Best Match result
    + Right click on Command Prompt and click 'Run as administrator'
    + You may be asked for permission to continue, if so, click "Yes"!
- **Check your Execution Policy`**
    + In your admin shell, run `Get-ExecutionPolicy`
    + If it returns `Restricted` or `Undefined` run: `Set-ExecutionPolicy Unrestricted`
- **Install Chocolatey**
    + In your admin shell, run `Set-ExecutionPolicy Bypass -Scope Process -Force; [System.Net.ServicePointManager]::SecurityProtocol = [System.Net.ServicePointManager]::SecurityProtocol -bor 3072; iex ((New-Object System.Net.WebClient).DownloadString('https://chocolatey.org/install.ps1'))`
    + It may take a minute for the command to complete
    + If no errors come up, you should be good to go!
- **Confirm your Chocolatey installation**
    + **Close your admin shell and return to GitBash**
    + In GitBash, run `choco --help` and you should be greeting with a help menu
        
_Note that to upgrade Chocolatey (recommended before you install anything via Chocolately) run: `choco upgrade chocolatey`_

--- 

### Get node locally and install a global package
Although we will use Docker for many things, we will also install node locally for some global use tools that we may use.
- **Download and install nodejs using the [official installers](https://nodejs.org/en/download/)**
    + When going through the install wizard, the standard options are all okay for our usage
    + Check the box to allow automatic installation of additional tools
    + Select 'yes' when asked if you want to let node make changes to your device
    + After the installation, lookout for the Powershell window prompting to install the additional tools and press any key to continue
    + Again, select 'yes' when asked if you want to let Powershell make changes to your device
    + Get a cup of tea, this part can take a few minutes as it installs a bunch of other good things!
    + Once the scripts have finished running, follow the prompt to hit ENTER and restart your machine
- **Confirm your node installation**
    + After restarting your machine, open GitBash and type `node -v`
    + If you see a version number eg. `v12.19.0` then your install was successful!
    + You should also get version numbers back for `npm -v` and `npx -v`
    + **If this does not work** try `winpty node -v`
    + **If winpty worked** then follow the [instructions below](#the-bashrc-file) to add an alias to a `.bashrc` file
- **Install your first global node package**
    + `npm install -g laughs`
    + `ha` - wait for a joke! 

---

### Get python locally and discover the Zen of Python
To have control of our Python versions we are going to use a tool called `pyenv`. pyenv allows us to easily switch between different Python versions which can be very helpful when working on different projects and with other people.
- **Download and install pyenv with Chocolately**
    + In GitBash, run `choco install pyenv-win`
    + Restart your bash shell and run `pyenv --version` to confirm the installation
        - If you receive a permission denied or a command not found error, check the [documentation](https://github.com/pyenv-win/pyenv-win#finish-the-installation) for how to manually set environment variables even if you used [Chocolatey](https://chocolatey.org/).
    + Navigate to your home directory with `cd ~` and run `pyenv rehash`
- **Install Python 3.9.1 with pyenv and set it as your global default version**
    + At time of writing 3.9.1 is the latest stable version
    + `pyenv install 3.9.1` (we can easily get other versions later on if you want)
    + `pyenv global 3.9.1`
    + `pyenv rehash`
- **Confirm your python installation**
    + `python --version`
    + If you see a version number eg. `Python 3.9.1` then your install was successful!
    + You should also get a version number back for `python -m pip --version`
    + **If this does not work** try `winpty python --version`
        + **If winpty worked** then follow the [instructions below](#the-bashrc-file) to add an alias to a `.bashrc` file
    + **If you are still having trouble, see the [Troubleshooting](#Troubleshooting) guide below** - _this is more likely if you already have Python installed and/or are running Windows 10 1905 or newer_
- **Check out the 'Zen of Python'**
    + `python` - to enter a python shell (bye, bash!)
    + `import this` - this will show you the Zen of Python!
    + `exit()` - to exit the python shell

---

### Install Docker
- Download [Docker Desktop](https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop)
- Test your install from the command line by running `docker run hello-world`

---

## The .bashrc file
A `.bashrc` file is a configuration file for the bash shell - which you'll be using if running GitBash. The dot at the beginning means it is a hidden file!

**To access the file**
- In GitBash, run `cd ~` which will take you to your home directory
- Run `ls -lah` to see all the files (even hidden ones) in the directory
- Look for one called `.bashrc`
    + If it does not exist, create it with `touch .bashrc`
- Open it in a text editor of your choice

**To add an alias** \
If you find yourself typing something lengthy a lot, you can create an 'alias'. For example, if you have to run `winpty python` everytime you want to run a python shell, you might wish that you could just use `python`.

The anatomy of an alias definition is : `alias <what-i-want-to-use>='<the-actual-command>'`
- eg. `alias node='winpty node'` (genuinely useful)
- eg. `alias npm='winpty npm'` (genuinely useful)
- eg. `alias python='winpty python'` (genuinely useful)
- eg. `alias pip='winpty pip'` (genuinely useful)
- eg. `alias showstuff='ls'` (genuinely not useful)

**After making changes** \
Make sure you save the file and **reload** GitBash before trying out your shiny new aliases - or any other changes/additions you may make in this file!
- Either close and reopen GitBash
- Or run `source ~/.bashrc`

---

## Troubleshooting

### Issues installing Python via `pyenv`
- If you are running Windows 10 1905 or newer, you made need to disable the built-in Python launcher via Start > "Manage App Execution Aliases" and disabling the "App Installer" aliases for Python.
- Failing that you may have to alter your [environment variables](https://www.architectryan.com/2018/03/17/add-to-the-path-on-windows-10/) so that any `pyenv` paths are higher in the list, and therefore take precedence over any other Python paths, including other Python package managers such as Anaconda. _(Remember to restart your machine for changes to take effect.)_
- As a last resort you might have to [uninstall Python](https://www.educative.io/edpresso/how-to-uninstall-python) before `pyenv` will work.