# Lambda Layer ARN's
If the Lambda Layers are available in [keith's Layers](https://github.com/keithrozario/Klayers/tree/master/deployments), then they are much easier to deploy. Gives an easy collection of Python Packages as AWS Lambda(λ) Layers.

# Creating your own Custom Layers
create a layer using Flask as an example. Creating a Lambda Layer with Docket has four main steps:
1. Setup the a local directory for the layer
2. Use Docker to install the layer packages
3. Create a zip file of your directory
4. Upload to AWS using the AWS CLI

## Creating the file Structure
```bash
mkdir flask-layer
cd flask-layer
mkdir -pv python/lib/python3.8/site-packages
```
A new directory called flask-layer is created along with a subdirectory python/lib.python3.8/site-packages where we will install our Python packages to.

Add a ```requirements.txt``` in the root of this folder e.g: 
```
flask==1.1.1
```
File structure should be as follows: 
```
flask_layer
├── python
|   └── lib
|       └── python3.8
|           └── site-packages
└── requirements.txt
```
## Install the requirements with Docker. 
Run below in powershell when you are in root directory
``` c
docker run -v ${pwd}:/var/task "amazon/aws-sam-cli-build-image-python3.8" /bin/sh -c "pip install -r requirements.txt -t python/lib/python3.8/site-packages; exit"
```
After running the command you should see the site-packages directory you created in the previous step populated with all your dependencies.

## Uploading Your Layer to AWS
AWS requires all the layer code to be in a zip archive, so we need to zip everything in the python directory.
```bash 
zip -r flask-layer.zip python
```

Now the layer can be uploaded to AWS using the AWS CLI. You need to provide a few parameters in this step:

+   ```layer-name``` is the name your want to give your layer
+   ```description``` to briefly summarize the layer
+   ```zip-file``` is the path to the zip archive you created in the previous step
+   ```compatible-runtimes``` details the Python versions your layer is compatible with

Enter the following into the terminal to publish our layer to AWS:
``` c
aws lambda publish-layer-version \
    --layer-name "flask-layer" \
    --description "Lambda Layer for Flask 1.1.1" \
    --zip-file "fileb://flask-layer.zip" \
    --compatible-runtimes "python3.8"
```
